in this box is a real preserved human
brain named Betty and I think you should
hold it oh my God it's wet and now we're
going to go through all the tools and
tricks to make your brain as healthy as
it could be are you ready Wendy Suzuki
the neuroscientist and professor at New
York University whose firsthand research
on the brain is helping to improve
memory learning and higher cognitive
abilities in humans let me start with
exercise all the research shows the more
you exercise the more change in your
brain we notice every drop of sweat
counted and the best kind of exercise
that you can do is what about things
that we consume food drink and alcohol
if it's on the meditarranean diet go
ahead
[Music]
coffee and then my memory is not great
most people feel that but there's four
things that you can do to make memories
stick number one is is it true that if
we have less friends then our brain will
shrink yes loneliness damages the brain
can you say if someone's in love in the
brain yes in the side here a lot of the
reward areas are activated doesn't that
mean then that if we don't fall in love
the love part of my brain gets smaller
and would that make it more difficult to
love in the future that's a great
question so Wendy do you have any brain
routines absolutely so every morning I
like to oh and then I do the most
powerful tool that you can do to protect
your brain from aging and
neurodegenerative disease states which
is
we've just hit 6 million subscribers on
the D Co um so me and my team would like
to do something we've never done before
as little thank you and we're calling it
The dire of coo subscriber raffle and
here is how it works every episode this
month we're going to pick three current
subscribers at random and we'll send one
of you a 1,000 voucher one of you
tickets to come and watch the D SE
behind the scenes live with our team and
one of you will have a 10-minute phone
call with me to discuss whatever you
want to talk about if you're a
subscriber you're in the raffle thank
you from the bottom of my heart for
allowing me to do something that me and
my team love doing so much it is the
greatest honor of my lifetime and I hope
it I hope it continues uh off into the
Future Let's get to the
[Music]
episode you just said to me that much of
your work is focused on making sure
people have big fat fluffy brains yes
why does that matter it matters because
a big fat fluffy brain brain is a
healthy brain and my whole first book
healthy brain happy life was about how I
learned to use all the tools and tricks
and magic of neuroscience and psychology
to make my brain work better and I so
needed it at that moment my life got
better I got happier it is a pathway to
a happy life I think having a very
healthy big fat fluffy brain do you
think people appreciate the importance
of that that brain no I think they
ignore it all the
time and I think that is part of my uh
part of my message to everybody that
that the human brain that is the one in
your head right now is the most complex
structure known to human kind not
Einstein's brain not Marie K's brain but
the one in your head and when you think
about that it gives you more of a self
appreciation of all of the computations
that is taking for me to see you and
appreciate your face and be able to
remember your face next time I see you
when I go to my diary of a CEO podcast
and and choose an episode all of that is
is such a complex structure um you start
to appreciate your own kind of brain
functioning more I think that's a very
important thing to do why don't we
appreciate our brains because we
appreciate a lot of other things yeah we
spend a lot of time on our like our
muscles yeah our ABS yeah
I think that that's a great analogy and
part of my goal is to kind of shift the
focus from focusing on certain body
parts to focusing on what our brain is
doing for us what it can do for us and
what we can do to change your
environments to get to that big fat
fluffy brain to get it healthy to get it
happy to get it growing if I achieve a
big fat fluffy
brain how would my life be different I'm
saying me Steve Bart I'm I'm a podcaster
I'm I'm an entrepreneur relationships
I've Got Friends girlfriend family how
would I show up differently if I was
able to make my brain big fat and fluffy
yeah so uh let me start with the two
areas that we know respond really really
well to things like meditation and
exercise those two brain areas are the
hippocampus critical for long-term
memory your ability to form and retain
new long-term memories and for facts and
events and the second brain area is your
prefrontal cortex right behind your
forehead critical for your ability to
shift and focus attention um it's
important for your personality for
decision making can you show me on there
there's a you brought absolutely I
brought a human brain you have bring
that you have a model of a brain as well
I have a model of the brain okay let's
start with the model of the
brain so here is a model of the human
brain so there's a front part and a back
part this front part is right behind our
forehead that's the pre Al cortex
critical for the ability to shift and
focus attention also a part of the brain
that is very responsive to what you
bring into your life exercise actually
really helps the prefrontal cortex
meditation helps area 10 of the
prefrontal cortex which is right in the
very front right here the second brain
area that you will benefit from when you
make your brain big and fat and fluffy
is a structure called the hippocampus
which is which is very deep in this
lobe deep in this lobe right here which
is the temporal lobe the hippocampus
hippocampus means seahorse and the
hippocampus is critical for your ability
to to form and retain new long-term
memories for facts and events you have
one on the right and you have one on the
left so for you Superstar podcaster what
do you need to do you need to remember
all the details of that guest that
you're sitting in front of you need to
be able to focus what did say what do I
want to uh ask next and how do I want to
come back to those things that is a
combination of what your prefrontal
cortex is doing for you and your
hippocampus is doing for you so I submit
that you when you do these things that
we know from Neuroscience it are going
to make your prefrontal cortex and your
hippocampus big and fat and fluffy you
will be better at doing your job as a
podcaster I am better as a dean and a
professor of Neuroscience and and
teaching in class for example is where
I'm using my prefrontal cortex in my
hippocampus the most most of us would
benefit from these things that make our
brains big and fat and fluffy was there
a point in your life where you had a
personal Epiphany or Revelation about
the brain that made you so passionate
about the subject absolutely absolutely
so this story starts when I was in the
middle of getting tenure um at New York
University so it takes six years uh you
have six years to P prove yourself as a
scientist and do something
groundbreaking and if you don't you're
fired so no big deal no pressure there
and I decided to only just work work
work work I didn't have a lot of social
interactions I was just working and I
just just threw myself into work and uh
I was getting burnt out and um I decided
to go on a river rafting trip to Peru by
myself because I had no friends so i' go
on the river rafting trip and and it's
great it's beautiful we're river rafting
we're we're camping on Aztec burial
sites and it is just spectacular um but
I realized that I'm the weakest person
on this trip and when I got back after
this wonderful you know two weeks in
Peru I said I never want to feel like
the weakest person on a trip like that
again and it was so great to to be
moving and to be exercising so I decided
I'm going to go to the gym and I'm going
to continue this physical activity at
the gym and somehow it stuck I had I had
let myself go not no exercise at all and
when I started going to the gym
regularly I noticed that that great mood
that I found in Peru every day during
the river rafting trip stayed with me I
think everybody in my lab loved it when
I was going to the gym and I started to
notice not only I got stronger I was
feeling better that mood boost that I
got from physical activity was so
powerful but then one day this you asked
me about this Revelation I had it was
one day I was sitting in my office
riding a grant which is usually
something that I have to do very
regularly but usually something that I'm
pulling my hair out it's so hard it's
very competitive I'm competing against
Nobel laurates for the same pot of money
and I had this thought that went through
my mind which was gosh writing went well
today I I'd never had that thought
before ever in my I'd been there for
five years at at NYU writing grants and
so um I um I thought oh maybe maybe I'm
just having a good day I'm feeling good
but I realized that the um the writing
seemed to have been getting a little bit
better over time I had noticed it a
little bit if I think about it and the
only thing I had changed in my life was
regular physical activity inspired by
that trip to Peru
and so I'm a neuroscientist I went to
the literature and I asked well what do
we know right now about what exactly
exercise is doing and it showed at that
moment in time about 10 15 years
ago that exercise can improve your mood
exercise actually makes your memory work
better and exercise improves the
function of your prefrontal cortex and I
thought wow that that is
amazing but the last part of the story
was was that when all of this was going
on this was after this day of realizing
gosh something's you know my writing is
better and um maybe it's exercise um I
got a call from my mom who said that my
father wasn't feeling well and that he
had gotten lost driving back from the
coffee shop that he drove to every day
every afternoon for the last 20 years
and the hippocampus that structure
critical for memory is particularly
important important for spatial memory
and as an expert in the hippocampus as I
am I knew that that was a Telltale sign
of dementia and maybe Alzheimer's
dementia but as I talked to my father
and of course we went and got him a
neurology appointment I saw that
everything that seemed to be improving
in me that is memory Focus completely
and very very suddenly uh diminished in
him his memory was terrible he couldn't
focus he was also very depressed because
he could notice how poor his memory was
and I think those things together what I
was noticing in myself about the
physical effects of U the effects of
physical activity on my own brain
function and seeing my father go through
which what uh what was a really
precipitous loss of his cognitive
functions that turned out to be
Alzheimer's
dementia made me think that the power of
physical activity needed to be explored
more deeply and by me I I was waking up
in the morning thinking about what can
we what can I do to better understand
how physical activity could be used not
just for me for my students can they
study better can they learn better can
it help maybe not my father I wasn't
sure whether exercise could help my
father at that point but as people age
that was the Revelation that I had that
made me actually switch my research
Focus from memory function to
understanding the effects of physical
activity on the brain all of this is
rooted in
a fact that was once not considered a
fact which is the idea that our brains
can change shape yes yeah this idea of
brain plasticity I only really learned
about this a couple of years ago because
I think I like many people didn't
realize that like muscles my brain
changes shape based on what I do yes and
also what I consume yes I guess yes what
is the evidence or the studies that we
have that proves our brains do change
shape yeah that's such a great question
and uh it takes me back to the first day
of my freshman year at UC Berkeley when
I walked into the classroom I didn't
know it at the time but the classroom of
the professor that discovered brain
plasticity her name is Marian diamond
and she uh was the very first female PhD
in neuroanatomy that UC Berkeley ever
gave um I walked into her classroom in
the 80s when I went to college but she
discovered this in the late
1960s um when it was thought as you said
that the adult brain can't change at all
there's absolutely no evidence for it
and that was true at the time she
thought I don't think that's true let's
let's do a simple experiment let's try
and um uh look at the effects in two
randomly grouped set of rats one that
lives in what they would consider an
enriched environment
what would be an enriched environment
well for her it was a rat cage full of
toys that got changed out all the time
lots of other rats to play with and um
lots of lots of activity I think of it
as the Disney World of rat cages and she
compared the brains of those rats to
rats that she raised in kind of a shoe
box a smaller environment they got free
food and water all the food and water
they could eat and drink but maybe only
one other rat and no toys now if the
adult brat they were all the same age
they were adults if the if the adult
brain didn't change then there should be
absolutely no difference between the
brains raised in Disney World and the
brains raised in the shoe box but she
found that the the brains of those rats
raised in the Disney World of rat cages
the outer covering of the brain the
outside of the brain here uh I'm
pointing to the outside of this brain
model here called the cortex it was
actually thicker she was she was a
neuroanatomist and she showed that the
thickness of this outer covering
actually grew what does that mean there
were more synaptic connections there in
not in the whole brain in certain brain
areas that made sense the visual
cortical area there was much more visual
stimulation in the Disney World of rat
cages the motor areas were thicker the
somata sensory the touch areas were
thicker because they were interacting in
a much more complex way with their Touch
system and that was the first
demonstration the adult brain could
change and that it would actually make
the cortex of the brain grow and now we
know what is it about the Disney World
of rat cages you know um is it the toys
should we all be playing with toys later
study showed that you get almost
identical effects just by giving rats a
running wheel physical activity is doing
all of that has the potential to change
all of that in the rodent brain and now
in the human brain didn't they find
something similar with um London taxi
drivers I always hear this I thought it
was like a wasn't sure if it was true or
like a rumor but no no no it's
absolutely true that is a different form
of brain plasticity which is something
that we all do and my students do
hopefully very well which is learning so
can learning the Streets of London which
are I can't remember the the the number
of different streets that London taxi
cab drivers have have to learn to pass
the famous test called the knowledge but
I do remember that it takes them four
years to study for this test it is
intense uh um knowledge you have to
learn all the lawful ways to get from
all the big landmarks to be a certified
London taxi cab driver and what uh my
colleague El Eleanor Maguire uh
professor of neuroscience at University
College London did is she followed w be
London taxi cab drivers during their
four years of the knowledge this test
for London taxi cab drivers knowing that
half of them were going to fail they
they were not going to make it and so
she tested them at the beginning and
asked how is your memory uh and how big
is your hippocampus identical for all
all of the uh wannabe London taat cab
drivers before they started she scanned
their brains yeah she scanned their
brains and she tested their memory okay
behaviorally
then they go through half of them drop
out they don't become London tax cab
drivers and half of them become
certified London taxic cab drivers after
successfully learning all of this now
let's see how big is your hippoc campus
and how good is your memory the people
that passed the test and became London
tat cab drivers the posterior part of
their hippocampus which is the part we
know is important for it with posterior
is back towards the back of the head the
posterior part of the hip of Campus
which is kind of a cigar shaped
structure that goes from the front part
of the brain to the back part of the
brain that back part of the brain was
significantly bigger in those London
successful London taxi cab drivers
compared to the failed London taxi cab
drivers and the memory of the successful
London taxi cab drivers were now
superior to the memory of the wannabe
London TX cab drivers that failed so
that is example of how intense learning
in a particular part of the brain um uh
we know the posterior hippocampus is
absolutely involved in spatial learning
uh that can change the actual structure
and the function how much of a
difference can we make I'm 31 years old
now yeah so if I got serious about my
brain health yeah how much of a
difference could I realistically see you
know I'm trying to figure out if it's
worth it yeah if it's worth caring about
my brain is is there any evidence within
the literature within studies that have
been done that show if I start now even
though I'm like 30 31 years old my life
will be different in the future in the
areas that I care about profoundly if I
start caring about my
brain let me be very very um um concrete
here the answer is absolutely yes first
I'm going to give you results of a study
in people that are 65 and older so
studied people that are 6 65 and older
and asked what is the probability of
getting dementia in the next six years
depending on the level of activity that
you have just right now physical
activity physical activity and they
measured it in how many walks you take
per week and if you took three walks a
week or more you were 30% less likely to
develop Dementia in the next 5 years so
ooh 30
% uh less likely to develop dementia my
father passed away of Alzheimer's
dementia that makes me sit up and take
notice but the but the thing that should
make you as a 31-year-old uh really sit
up and take notice is the larger
correlations that show that the longer
you have regular physical activity in
your life the longer you're able to
Stave off dementia the more active you
are over your lifetime um that first
study shows that it's never too late to
start you can start walking regularly
which is doable when you're uh perhaps
at that age but the longer you stay
active the bigger and fatter and
fluffier your brain will be why does
that make sense so one key piece of
information that I haven't told you yet
is that we know that physical activity
is releasing a every single time you
move your body you releasing a whole
bunch of neuro chemicals in your brain
some of them make you just feel good
serotonin dopamine noradrenaline
endorphins yeah I feel good if I go out
for a walk I feel better than if I had
been sitting here for eight hours but
the other thing that gets released every
single time is growth factors I like to
call it a bubble bath of neurochemicals
that happens every time you move your
body what that growth factor does is it
goes directly into your hippocampus and
it helps brand new cells grow GR in your
hippocampus the hippocampus is only one
of two total brain areas where new cells
can grow that's not the same as synapsis
which are Connections in the cells that
are already there but the hippocampus
can grow new cells and this is really
important because many people know that
the hippocampus is attacked first in
Alzheimer's dementia and so exercise is
not going to eliminate that disease
state but if you start with a huge
fluffy hippocampus it's going to take
that disease that much longer to
actually damage enough of your
hippocampus so that you start seeing
those telltale signs of memory
impairment that comes with Alzheimer's
disease and and dementia in general same
thing with their prefrontal cortex your
prefrontal cortex can grow with uh
physical activity that's not neurons but
new synapses can grow age and neurod
degenerative disease states can damage
cells but also take away synapses I've
got two questions on that so the first
is about dementia and Alzheimer's do we
know what's causing it no we still don't
know
no and there's not good drugs
unfortunately right now there's a lot of
links to lifestyle choices though right
yes absolutely and so of course from
based on what I just said my number one
most powerful tool that you can do to
protect your brain from aging and
neurodegenerative disease States is
start walking why do I start with that
because everybody can walk you don't
need to buy any new fitness outfits just
go out and walk more and then they say
oh well do I have to become a marathon
runner that could help too but everybody
can walk and from that study that I
mentioned in the 65y olds 30% reduction
in um the probability of getting
Alzheimer's with just walking you said
that if I go and start walking and I do
exercise my prefrontal cortex will grow
which is the decision- making center
right yes so does that mean then that if
I am somebody who is very sedentary I
don't do much physical activity that my
decision making will be worse compared
to what it could be with the same person
if they're active yes I mean that there
is that potential brain plasticity and
the Neuroscience of brain plasticity
tells us that absolutely with physical
activity uh you have great potential to
improve the function of your prefrontal
cortex and I must specify a little bit
uh the main function that is um that has
been shown to be particularly sensitive
to regular physical activity is um
shifting and focusing your attention so
being able to um listen to me while you
might be paying attention to uh the AV
guy that might be telling you something
right now so to be able to do that
effectively uh that that is one of the
things that we know is helped with
regular physical activity focus and
attention that kind of thing okay you
talked about memory as well is that does
that exist in the prefrontal cortex as
well uh there's a form of memory working
memory uh which is kind of scratch Pad
memory it's a Memory that um when we
used to have to remember telephone
numbers that that ability to remember a
Sev digigit at least in the United
States telephone number it's different
from long-term memory formation which is
memory for facts and events uh that is
dependent on the
hippocampus I feel like my memory is not
great most people feel
that why is my memory not as good as
other people because I I noticed this
when I I was with my friend in um
Thailand many years ago I think I was 21
years old and we could like leave the
house and go on our little mopeds for
about an hour yeah and he could navigate
us back home without needing satav or
Google Maps and if I go three minutes
down the street I'm lost and I always
wondered why that was is it and then
even with names and stuff I would always
he's my best friend he still is one of
my best friends for for seven eight
years we ran a business together and he
would remember every name of every
person and I couldn't I wouldn't and so
I'd always T to him and say what was
that person's name again what's that you
know and I always wondered why my memory
he seemed to have this incredible memory
and mine seems to be pretty
rudimentary I would argue that um yeah
everybody has parts of their memory that
aren't as good as they want but also
other forms of memory that they're very
good at so I would guess I've only just
met you today that you're memory for
stories and storytelling and story
progress is excellent because it has to
be for the job that you do I bet you
it's much better than your friend that
can navigate back not everybody has a
perfect memory in all the different
dimensions and and it's like our
personality some people have a wonderful
sense of humor and others don't um it is
about how our brains are wired which is
defined both by nature and nurture our
genes and you know if I if I went to uh
stand up comedy class I would probably
get funnier but um uh but there's
probably a limit to my funniness
compared to other people so there's
different types of memory yes in your
book you talk about there being I think
is it three different types of memory in
total that are formed in the hippocampus
there's lots of different names for
forms of memory in the hippocampus um
but I like to describe it as the
hippocampus is critical for our memory
for facts and and events um also called
declarative memory or COG itive memory
uh another form of memory that's
dependent on a completely different
structure is motor memory the memory
that you uh use to learn how to play
tennis or pickle ball or whatever you're
playing and it's not declarative I can't
declare how I do a backhand in in in
tennis but it is in your motor functions
and and this is dependent on the
striatum a motor related structure and
then there's the prefrontal cortex
dependent on that working memory or
scratch Pad memory keeping things in
mind so um you and I are both trying to
remember what we've just said so we can
we can link it to things that we might
say in the future one of things that I
found really interesting both as a
marketeer but also as a podcaster and as
someone that's making a lot of content
and trying to get people's attention was
as I was reading through your work it
became quite clear to me that there's a
bit of an overlap between memory and
attention in in many respects because
absolutely you were talking about these
four things that make facts or events
memorable yes and many of those things
are things that I think about as a
marketeer when I'm trying to get someone
to you know engage with something click
on something buy something yeah what are
those four things okay can we go through
them absolutely so I like to say there
are four things that make memory stick
and this is after 25 or 30 years
studying the hippoc campus and and how
memories work number one is obvious
repetition okay you you remember things
with repetition number two not as
obvious Association the hippocampus is
an associative structure it Associates
one thing with the other uh for example
your name and your face so I'm I've just
met you and I I will remember your name
and your face now but it also helps you
remember things like who's married to
each other associating the husband with
the wife uh have you heard of The Memory
Palace uh yes yes so this is a technique
that has been used for many many ages uh
to help remember things and it is a
strategy where you picture a spal
location that's very familiar to you
like your childhood home when you need
to remember a list of items you take an
imaginative walk through that very
familiar environment and place those
items in particular locations in the
environment that is associating
something really familiar your childhood
home you know every corner of it with
the new thing you need to remember and
that works uh and has worked for memory
champions for many years because the
hippocampus Associates things together
that's number two Association number
three is novelty we remember novel
things I've never been to this
particular Studio ever before in my 26
years in New York and Brooklyn so this
is a novel thing and I I will remember
coming here uh to do this podcast with
you our brains and this is where it
interacts with the attention system our
attention system focuses on things that
are novel why because it could be
dangerous if I've seen it things over
and over and over again I don't notice
them they go into the background it's
not going to hurt me any you know it's
not it's not going to cause me any
danger cliche that's why cliche doesn't
work in marketing exactly yeah and so
but something novel oo that really uh
perks people up I use that in my
teaching all the time surprise students
uh with uh an element of what you want
them to learn and they will remember it
better but the fourth one which is so
powerful and we know it intuitively we
understand this intuitively is emotional
resonance makes things more memorable we
remember the happiest and the saddest
things in our lives because that
emotional resonance is solidifies those
memories where does that come from it
comes from a structure called the
amydala that sits right in front of the
hippocampus right in the front of the
temporal lobe right here and the
hippocampus is right behind it amydala
me means almond it's an almond shaped
structure and it sits right in front of
um the kind of tube shaped structure
that is the hippocampus behind it and
the amydala is kind of infusing uh the
hippocampus and kind of getting giving
it a little jolt when it's emotionally
resonant either really happy or really
sad
you brought with you what you've told me
is a real human brain yes I did now I'm
not sure if you're just whining me up
but we're talking here about novelty and
surprise and that's right things you'll
never forget an emotional resonance
correct and as you're saying that I was
conscious that over in the corner of the
room it appears that there's a human
brain in a box so Jack is just bringing
the human brain in yes I've never seen a
human brain before you've never seen
that's why I brought you gloves so you
can hold it if you like if you like do
you have permission to if there is a
human brain in this box and you're not
winding me up did you have to get
permission from the owner of that brain
so um this was purchased uh lawfully um
by my department the center for neural
science at New York University so it is
lawfully ours to use as a teaching tool
and it does bring enormous novelty to
any situation that I go into and makes
people really think about their brain in
a new way which is why I bring it what
is in that box in this box is a real
preserved human brain named
Betty was the person who used to own
that brain called Betty no we don't know
the name of the person I named this
brain Betty so can can you tell if it's
a man or a woman no I can't ah man men
and women brains not different at all
they are but in very very very subtle
ways that we wouldn't be able to tell
just looking at the the outside of the
brain like this okay I'm ready are you
ready I think
so okay so I'm going to
open the Hat Box no way is that I'm
going pull out are you joking is that
really a brain it is a real preserved
human
brain there it is frontal lobe frontal
lobe occipital lobe for vision occipital
lobe back there and in this brain I
don't know if you can see it from over
there if I pull apart the two
hemispheres you can see how
deep the the folds of the brain the
surface is folded in that deep into the
brain which expands the surface area of
the outside of the cortex the rat cortex
is flat there's no folds humans and
elephants and dolphins have lots of
folds they have much higher capacity for
computation because of the folds that
you see in this brain it's smaller than
I was expecting really half the people
say it's smaller half the people say wow
that's that's enormous interesting is
that the the color of a brain the color
of the brain is darker than the real
brain if we opened up my head right now
um because of the form alahh the the
preservative chemical that this has been
sitting in for at least 26 years this
brain has been in my department for ever
since I got here 26 years ago I feel
like I probably should hold it I think
you should hold
it oh my
God sweat
yes so I mean that that has that defined
this person's whole life how they saw
felt smelled uh heard and thought about
the
world just right there in your one hand
in your right hand it's crazy to think
that this little thing is oh it's
different underneath yes it's crazy to
think that this little thing this
little that's the start of the spinal
cord right there that you're pointing at
and there's stuff at the underneath at
the back this that is the cerebellum uh
brain structure critical for fine motor
movement um so we wouldn't be able to
walk smoothly if you have damage in your
cerebellum isn't it interesting that
like everything as you say everything
this person worried about every thought
every memory every relationship all of
their education the school they went to
the university everything they saw and
remembered and all of their trauma y and
their anxiety and maybe their
depression everything they went through
even their last days before they died is
like captured in this little ball of
like tofu yep sits in my hand an entire
human being's existence it's true what
they watched on TV their favorite movie
their favorite number color everything
is in this tiny little bowl of
tofu it's true
oh gosh it is amazing and actually in
real life firm tofu is the consistency
of of the brain I often bring in a um
you know a block of of firm tofu um when
I demo this for students in addition to
Betty do you remember the first time you
saw a human brain I do did it change how
you think about your own brain it
changed my life because I was like I
want to study that that is the coolest
thing that I've ever seen in my whole
life and I want to study that and I want
to be just like her and um and so it it
really like okay now I I decided this is
what I want to do and it was it
was it was
life-changing I say that because we you
know at the start of this conversation
we said that most of us don't appreciate
our brain a lot of people don't even
realize it's there but the minute I had
a brain scan one day and that brain scan
really changed my life because seeing my
own brain for the first time it was the
push that I needed to start caring more
about how my decisions and behaviors are
impacting it so let's talk about how I
can make that ball of tofu in my head
super healthy super big fat and fluffy
you talked about exercise earlier on but
we didn't really dig dig into exactly
what you mean by exercise because
exercise I think is multifaceted and
definition what kind of exercise should
I be doing to make my ball of tofu in my
head
great yeah optimal mhm well all the
research shows that the best kind of
exercise that you can do is anything
that gives you aerobic activity that is
getting your heart rate up so that that
goes for you know power walking will get
your heart rate up soccer so many
different things name your activity so
many people want to say oh my favorite
activity will that work and I always
just say is it is your heart rate up
when you're doing it if the answer is
yes then yeah that that works great we
know that that level of aerobic activity
is critical because that's going to
release that growth factor maximally to
get into your hippocampus uh that will
grow those new brain cells how much so
um I have an answer to that so um we did
two different experiments in my lab one
in um low-fit people people that are
really not exercising very much at all
less than 30 minutes um um in the last
three three weeks you you've uh moved
your body and um we asked what could we
see any behavioral Improvement in your
memory function from your hippocampus or
your uh ability to shift and focus
attention if we ask you to move your
body in an aerobic way for two to three
times a week and we collaborated with a
spin class so clearly very aerobic and
what we found was in those people that
did successfully do two to three times a
week of 45 minute aerobic activity their
mood got significantly better their
memory function got better and their
ability to shift and focus attention got
significantly better so that gives a
little bit of a guideline for low-fit
people two to three times a week can
start to give you some of those some of
those cognitive changes but you don't
look low fit so let me let me answer the
question you're about to ask me with
like what about me I I exercise pretty
regularly and um how much how much do I
need so to answer that question we went
to another spin studio and we said look
we're going to give you free classes you
could exercise as much as you want in
this in this um at this studio and uh um
go up to seven times a week and the
control was just stay the same you know
you they were they were working out
twice a week at at the studio control
was the other group that were you were
testing them against yes exactly and so
what we found was
basically every drop of sweat counted
the more you exercise the more change in
your brain we noted both your
hippocampal function prefrontal function
and mood if you you were already getting
benefit you know you're already going
twice a week but the more you did the
more brain changes you got so that that
doesn't give the formula that I would
like but we were heading in that
direction which is part of one of the
questions that I want to answer but I
love to leave people with the idea that
every drop of sweat counts for building
your brain into the big fat fluffy brain
that you really
want and then in the real world again
making it super um real for people yeah
how how does that change how I show up
yeah if you allow it to should have a
beautiful effect on your mindset um that
your mindset around um
how often should I take wake up an 30
minutes early and do that walk before I
start my day or accept the the
invitation to go uh walk the dog with
with a neighbor um it's not an
obligation it is something that you're
doing for yourself it is going to have
direct benefits on that ball of tofu as
you call it in your head it's going to
make it work better and and I mean I
think the most immediate thing that I
benefit from every single day say is the
mood boost that you get from that
serotonin dopamine nor adrenaline that
gets released every time you move your
body I always think that because
obviously I do a lot of podcasting and
it's I'm super reliant on my brain being
attached to my mouth and sometimes I
notice that it's not you know what I
mean like sometimes I'm not articulate I
can't get my thoughts together whatever
yes and I always try and figure out the
correlation between what I did that day
when I have a good day versus a bad day
and I've from from your and also I speak
on stage sometimes so I've often asked
myself because I saw Tony Robbins the
speaker one day on a trampoline before
he goes up on stage I ask myself okay
should I be doing a workout in my green
room before I go up on stage for a big
talk or presentation you think I should
oh yeah absolutely what's the basis of
that in science and a science uh it's
the basis is that immediate effect so
there's three key effects that we know
happen every time you move your body
first one is mood you're going to get
your dopamine your serotonin up um
second is focus and attention so so as
single workout isn't going to make more
synapses in your prefrontal cortex but
the prefrontal cortex uses dopamine and
so um it's clear that even a single
workout can make your prefrontal cortex
work better in terms of focus attention
also very important anytime you're
speaking and the third is reaction time
your reaction time it you know motor
your you're you're working your motor
cortex when you move your body and your
response and reaction time is
significantly shorter after a even a
single workout compared to if you just
don't work out and sit sit um alone so
great great things to do a great thing
to do before you you stand up and speak
what
about
coffee I I'm trying to figure out if
coffee is good for my brain bad for my
brain I've had a couple of mixed
messages around the impact it might be
having yeah you know caffeine is a
stimulant and uh people respond to that
kind of stimulant uh in different ways
overstimulation with caffeine is is not
good for your your ability to put words
together you know this is where I turn
to a a main theme in in my book healthy
brain happy life with this which is
self-experimentation for you how what
can you titrate your coffee to see what
level of coffee is best for whatever
your podcast or you're giving a talk the
other thing that can work
similarly to coffee that that I've
started uh and that I do every morning
is um hot cold contrast showers because
that cold that you shower on yourself
after the heat um stimulates adrenaline
in you a natural adrenaline o it wakes
you up and okay it was painful the first
kind of few times I tried it but then
you get addicted to it and I have
forgotten to do it and gotten back in
the show hour just to douse myself with
cold water because I feel better when I
do that for for you know first thing in
the morning so lots of different things
that one can explore with okay on the
other side of the coin then what are
some of the central behaviors that
people do that destroy their
brain well sedentary behavior is one of
them um not getting enough sleep is
critical we haven't talked about sleep
yet sleep is so important for normal
functioning of the brain I like to scare
my students by saying that um you know
in torture situations if you deprive a
person of sleep for too long they
literally die they they they die you
cannot function if you are deprived of
sleep for too many hours in a row it's
that critical yet we don't we we happily
you know watch too much Netflix at night
and and and and get only five hours of
sleep when we could have had eight so um
what's happening exactly why is it so
important well there's um there's so
many different things I'm going to I'm
going to say two one is that we know
that in regular um um healthy sleep
there is activity in the hippocampus
that helps you strengthen the memories
that you have formed in that previous
day it's called consolidation and it's
so important if you shorten that if you
don't get enough you are not
consolidating your normal everyday
memories and second it is uh the time
during sleep when all the metabolites
all that garbage that your brain is
producing because all biological cells
produce garbage it get kind of um
cleaned up um through the cerebral
spinal fluid that that is flowing
through your brain and if you do not get
enough sleep you build up garbage
metabolites in your brain it's like you
have a gunky brain and do you feel like
I feel like I have gunk in my brain when
I don't sleep enough that is exactly
what is what is happening when you think
about um things that we consume you know
like food and drink and alcohol and all
these kinds of things is there is there
anything that if I'm trying to have an
optimal brain I should be yeah having or
not having yeah well so um I think the
most evidence is around the benefit of
the Mediterranean diet which is
basically all healthy uh um kind of
organic not organic but nonprocessed is
the word I was trying to think of things
to eat that are very very colorful there
is so much evidence about how good that
is generally for the brain that that is
my go-to like what should I eat well is
it on the Mediterranean diet if it is
then go ahead if it's too processed only
do it just a little bit is it true that
if we have less friends if we have less
strong relationships if we're lonely
yeah then our brain will shrink and is
more prone into dementia and Alzheimer's
and things like that yes we are social
creatures and um there are uh really
powerful studies that have shown the
correlation between the number of social
connections that we have including just
saying hello to the Barista at Starbucks
it's not a close friendship that you
develop over 30 years it's it's just how
many people you interact with and greet
and Longevity the more people you are
regularly interacting with the longer
you are living overall longevity but if
you go into brain health absolutely it's
also very very healthy for you it also
brings happiness so uh friend and
colleague of mine um Robert wallinger uh
studied um what makes people happy the
study started in the 20s 1920s in
Harvard and after all of those many many
many decades the answer is what brings
happiness is a strength of your Social
connections so it makes you happier it
makes you live longer and and uh yes
loneliness on the on the um flip side
causes stress uh long-term stress that
that damages the brain and uh yeah in
the long term can can make it smaller
and uh less healthy do you have any
brain routines like like a morning
routine for your brain absolutely so
every morning I like to wake up and I do
a um tea meditation which is a
meditation over the brewing and drinking
of tea and this is after many years of
yo-yo meditating I knew meditation was
good but I just couldn't really get into
it and um I was introduced to this form
of meditation um from uh by a monk who
who invited me to Tea and and just did
this silent meditation outside in a
beautiful location and the ritual and
the um um the sequence of Brewing
drinking
seeping uh re starting over again kind
of kept me in kept me in the flow and so
I start with about a 45 minute tea
meditation uh then I do about a 30
minute workout I try and do cardio
strength sometimes I do yoga sometimes I
just do
Mobility um and then I have breakfast
and then I go to work oh and then I I do
that H hot cold contrast shower is also
something very helpful for my brain
health because it it really does in me
that adrenaline boost that I get just
energizes me and I love that feeling at
the beginning of the day just going back
to that question because I want to close
off on it as well the the idea of what
would I have to do to destroy my brain
so no sleep yeah I'm GNA be sedentary
yeah I'm GNA have no friends yeah and
smoking smoking is very bad for your
health and and your brain okay um
alcohol alcohol I mean yes long-term
alcohol can cause significant and named
Brain disas diseases um moderation even
moderation now Studies have shown is not
very good and the reason why it's not
good is that alcohol disrupts your sleep
even though people drink it to to go to
sleep faster the sleep is much more
superficial and is not deep and it's not
the healthy sleep so that is uh not good
overall for your for the for Sleep um
depth and and health and therefore brain
health I'm going to eat a processed diet
to hurt my brain and I'm not going to
have a lifestyle that is novel because
we talked about learning right yes so
I'm not going to learn anything new all
of these things should shrink that
little you're not going to be mindful
also does mind is there is there
evidence that being mindful which is
like meditation and being in the moment
helps the brain it does uh there's
beautiful studies showing brain
plasticity um in the areas that are
important for focused attention
meditation the practice of meditation is
basically a practice of um enriching the
function of your prefontal cortex so you
can focus on that object either the
breath or or um loving kindness is is a
form of meditation so yes there there's
been studies that brain changes um occur
in long-term meditators that are that
are absolutely beneficial what if I'm on
social media all the time because isn't
that good for me because I'm going to be
seeing lots of new things all the time
and I'll be learning lots of new things
so isn't if I sat on a on a screen for
seven hours a day is that good for my
brain social media does that take you
away from real people and interacting
with real people yes okay then then it's
modulated by that the same thing there's
a difference and I think your brain
knows it and um look there's there's
enormous amounts of evidence showing
that the increase in use of social media
um especially in young kids uh correlate
with huge increases in depression and
anxiety levels particularly in young
girls so when when kids started getting
the smartphones and started to spend
more and more seven hours a day on
social media that's when the anxiety and
depression went up that's for young kids
I use social media as well as a tool for
business that is a little bit different
I'm not 13 years old and you're not 13
years old so so you know there there's
some warnings I think that need to go
into into that but but let me let me be
clear no it's not the same social media
is not the same as social interactions
face Toof face with people are you are
you concerned about what social media is
doing to our brains yes because we you
know I we hear those stats around you
know young young girls are struggling
most with social media and we think to
ourselves well that's because there's a
lot of like comparison and all these
kinds of things and there's a lot of
like toxic messaging and such but
if we think about the physiological
consequences of social media what it's
actually doing to our brains at a
chemical level yeah what what would you
as a
neuroscientist guess is that like is the
physiological harm to the brain not the
sort of psycholog I'm thinking about
like not the psychological okay oh my
God she's more this than me but like the
physiological harm but the psychological
harm causes stress stress releases
stress hormone that goes into the brain
that at too high and too constant a
level can start to First damage
connections and then kill cells so it's
it's intertwined um there and that that
is part of of what is happening um you
can't you know pull one one away from
the other because all you know we social
media is designed to kind of it's like
pulling the slot machine handle I pull
down on the feed and I get ping oh look
there's a nice picture and oh ping
there's notifications and comments Etc
it's that con you know I think about the
constant they say there's constant
dopamine here
they refer to is it a dopamine hit is
that's what happening when we're being
stimulated by social media or a slot
machine yes and is there is there any
harm in just a constant dopamine hit all
day every day well I would not I'm going
to answer that question by saying I
would not want to be addicted to
gambling that gambling is addictive it
it's hard to get away you you you lose
all these other things that we just
decided were all good for you including
sleep including social connections um
including exercise and I think that's
part of what social media is doing for
our young kids is not good that they're
not joining teams outside to be social
and interactive in uh in that kind of
now it seems like an oldfashioned way
but it's very very powerful way for
development um and brain health I think
I'm addicted to my
phone and I I often ask myself is that
is that a problem and from what you said
it sounds like the problem is what I
sacrifice yeah through that like
addiction to that device yes is that
that the issue the issue is I sacrifice
social connections maybe movement yeah
you know although I do work out every
day but the brain is smart enough to
know that there's no substitute for real
human connections absolutely absolutely
and that's going to make me what I'm
trying to I I need you to help me scare
me out of this phone addiction that I
think I have but I know many other
people have as well
so that is going to limit your potential
for brain growth for for brain
plasticity it is going to limit your
possibility for for you
know not to be dramatic but joy in in
your life there's different kinds of joy
that you have in in real
person-to-person social interactions
that it feels pretty good on social
media if you get lots of likes and you
know um but it's not the same and and um
I would I would say that to scare
yourself out you're going to have to
bite the bullet and do a twow week phone
detox what would that do to you how
would you feel I just could never
imagine such a thing well which is a
real shame isn't it really because I
just think about like my ancestors and
my parents they must they must think I'm
so strange but it's just the just the
way that like when my phone dies I'm
like it's like I'm like nervously
waiting for it to come back on I'm like
staring at it like oh my God like what
am I going to do with myself like uh and
I remember those studies they did on
people where they gave them the choice
of either sitting alone with their own
thoughts or giving themselves an
electric shock and a huge amount of
people in that study actually would
rather give themselves an electric shock
than just sit alone with their thoughts
because it's some kind of stimulation
that's kind of how I think I am now like
I don't know what I'd do without my
phone it's really sad I know there's
people listening to me now that think
I'm an absolute like
I'm really sad but it's just the N it's
the truth you know
and um I do wonder what it's doing to my
brain but I think you're right I think
it's actually what it's doing to my like
my life yeah the joy the connections the
being being there to experience things
and um I mean that point that you made
is a very profound one um the the not
wanting to be alone with your thoughts
is the core of meditation can you be be
alone with your thoughts and focus on
something something organic usually the
breath but also a thought like loving
kindness um that is a very powerful
practice to do and it and it's hard I
find it hard too um and I actually
notice I find it harder when I'm when
I'm using social media and when I'm
using my phone more
um but I feel most creative and most
imaginative when I do practice that that
is being alone with my thoughts what
comes into mind um how how does my own
imagination work which is very much
dependent on the hippocampus as well
it's putting together all these things
in your memory and new and interesting
ways that are unique for you or unique
for me and it doesn't work the same if
you are stimulating your brain with
social media all the time you um I mean
you wrote a book that kind of speaks to
what we're talking about here you wrote
a book about anxiety yes yes I did 2021
yeah I think the the US version is
called good anxiety isn't it slightly
different title in the US in the UK
yeah why did you write a book about
anxiety I wrote a book about anxiety
because I started to notice my
students getting much more anxious than
they ever used to be and this was before
the pandemic I mean I I I had the idea
to write this book in 2018
2019 and so first I noticed in the the
students they were getting so stressed
out before finals they never did that
before so so many accommodations they
were asking for and I'm like what's
going on here but then I realized it
wasn't just them like I'm getting more
anxious as well my friends are more
anxious and I really wanted to dive into
that I didn't want to be anxious in that
way uh because part of me was like oh
I'm just New Yorker I'm just anxious all
the time right because that's what New
Yorkers are no this has changed and we
forget that before the pandemic there
was there was still global warning
warming there was still political issues
that that lots of people including me
and all of my students were worried
about and that was the impetus for for
trying to dive in and ask well I made my
life happier with exercise what what is
the approach when it's anxiety and not
clinical anxiety I did not have clinical
anxiety and the vast majority of my
students didn't have clinical anxiety
they had what I called everyday anxiety
just worried about the things that are
going on in the world and there were
just more things to be worried about is
that normal is that human that is human
absolutely but is it human in
the in is the quantity in which we
experience it
human uh I think it is I mean because I
think about my ancestors I go they they
probably I don't know I always imagine
my ancestors kind of I don't know just
chilling you know like but they didn't
have they didn't have global warming
where the ocean is about to you know get
sucked up in plastic and and the the
ozone is gonna come come down no worries
like that at all but the everyday
anxiety for me is like
emails and what's up well by everyday
anxiety I mean the anxiety that people
are feeling today that is not at the
clinical level so all the things that we
just me mentioned global warming and
wars in multiple places in the world all
of that contributes to the higher level
of anxiety and your ancestors in mine
went through two world wars but and that
was anxiety-provoking no question about
it but they weren't also all the other
things that were um you know
contributing to it including the higher
than you know extremely high anxiety and
suicide levels of our young people that
are you know that strongly linked to
social media so that's that's another
element what did you find then when you
started uncovering and trying to go on
this search of figuring out you know the
the nature of anxiety and what we can do
about it did you first find that you're
right in your hypothesis that it is
increasing yeah yeah how much do you
know how
much um you know it it shifted over the
time that I wrote and published the book
because I started in 2018 and then it
was published in the middle of the
pandemic in 2021 where anxiety levels
went up approximately 20% worldwide so
um but the social media anxiety uh um
that is going up in girls even more than
20% and that's kind of in parallel so I
I actually don't know how to um
integrate those two levels but they're
both going in the same direction why are
women young women becoming more anxious
and suicidality amongst that age group
is rapidly
increased you know I think that um it's
it's that comparison that that is so
easy to do and I see it in my my own
work at the University that when I was
going to college I had no idea what rank
I was in in number in the application
but they could see that immediately they
know exactly what number they are in
each and every class they take in their
whole High School class in the in their
application to to the five schools that
they applied to or 10 or 15 now that
they're applying to that gives a much
higher level of stress when you know
those numbers immediately
um that we never had so so there are
stresses like that that that um they're
they're experiencing more information
yeah more it's funny because more social
connection but it's when I say social
connection I don't mean real world
social connection I mean more followers
and likes and more people that can
message me and tell me something and DM
me or comment on my thing right more
noise yeah the volume's increased which
is seems to be driving more anxiety
where do we experience anxiety where
from a physiological standpoint point
where is anxiety CU it feels like it's
in your chest yeah so anxiety is kind of
a fullbody experience and um anxiety is
um strongly linked with the stress
response so um an anxiety-provoking
situation you you um meet somebody that
you uh you know had a big fight with
before Oh I'm anxious I might have to
speak to that person before uh
that launches that launch is the stress
response um that is um dependent on
What's called the sympathetic nervous
system and so this is where it becomes
full body so what happens when your
fight ORF flight system is activated
your heart rate goes up your respiration
goes up your um irises get get bigger so
you can see everything and look out for
that that annoying person that you're
worried about um and blood is shunted
from your digestion and reprodu
reproductive organs towards your muscle
so you can fight or run away that's what
all of our ancestors evolved to protect
us from not not the social media post
but um the lion or the Tiger that could
come and attack us so it made sense for
that kind of stressor or that kind of
threat unfortunately our body's doing
the same exact thing when the nasty DM
comes in from somebody I wasn't sure who
it is but they're saying something
really bad about something I care about
a lot and we get this stress response we
get anxious because of that and uh
somebody asked me does that mean our
brain is not very smart and the answer
is our our our stress and our threat
system is not very smart it isn't
differentiating between the line that
could physically kill us and the DM that
might wound our pride but but will not
kill us but it causes the same kind of
um stress response and anxiety response
what do I do about that you have to
learn how to turn the volume of your own
anxiety down and part of that is I'm not
saying you have to not look at your DMs
and not look at or or not look at soci
social media there's lots of ways to
turn your anxiety down we've already
talked about uh some of those approaches
exercise immediately decreases anxiety
and depression levels and there you
don't even have to get aerobic 10
minutes of walking can significantly
decrease your anxiety and depression
levels that is a powerful tool that
everybody can use right right here right
now breath meditation did you know that
breath meditation that is deep breathing
um it's the oldest form of meditation
why because equal in opposite to that
fight ORF flight response that everybody
seems to know about is the rest and
digest part of your nervous system
called the parasympathetic nervous
system that calms you down it slows your
heart rate down slows your respiration
rate down and shuns blood from your
muscles towards your digestion and
reproductive organs so you can do those
weekend rest and digest kinds of things
well everybody should be asking well do
I have that system yes everybody has
that system everybody has a
parasympathetic nervous system how do I
activate that the best and most
effective way that you can activate that
right now is take three deep breaths
because that's the only thing you have
conscious control over that can launch
all the rest of that parasympathetic
activity slowing your heart rate I can't
slow my heart rate by thinking about it
can I take three deep slow breaths right
now absolutely and monks hundreds if not
thousands of years ago realize that that
is the thing that I can do immediately
to slow my slow my stress response down
it's very very powerful sadness sadness
sadness is um can be linked with anxiety
and um you know sad list like anxiety is
something that people I think would like
to kick out of their lives and just
never have
anymore at all if I could get rid of
sadness and anxiety I would be the
happiest person
alive but would you because my argument
in good anxiety my book good anxiety is
that these prickly emotions these
difficult emotions like anxiety like
sadness
are really really valuable because
they're they're focusing us on things
that we should be paying attention to
specifically anxiety it is a warning
system oh there's that person oh you
didn't have a good interaction you you
need to pay attention now should it
throw you into a an anxiety attack
perhaps not use some of these techniques
um like like deep breathing and going
for a walk but it is a warning system
and why is this valuable here's why it's
valuable it's valuable because when you
know what you are worried about your
fears that your anxiety focuses you on
it actually tells you about what you
hold most dear in your life and that is
something that we should all really want
to know so if you're a people pleaser um
you are doing lots of things to maybe
too many things to please people but
that means that you care
about personal interaction and I start
with this one because I'm a peop pleaser
and I realized that people pleasing
response and the anxiety that it does
evoke is reminding me that what's very
very valuable to me is that interaction
with people I care about that that's a
beautiful thing I value that in my life
in my
personality I'm going to let you in on a
little secret what is in the diary of a
COO Cup this cup that sits in front of
me when I interview these people
sometimes for 3 hours and sometimes
three people a day and the answer is
this perfect head I invested in the
company on Dragon's Den and since then
they've gone from an idea to the fastest
growing energy drink in the UK it is a
mat energy drink and it is absolutely
delicious but that's not why I choose to
drink it on this podcast the reason I
choose to drink it is because it gives
me what I call all day energy I don't
get the same crashes that I used to get
with other energy drinks if you're in
the middle of a conversation or you're
in the middle of a talk on stage or in
the boardroom the last thing you want to
do is have a crash you don't want
Jitters and you need focus and that is
why they now sponsor this podcast not
only is it delicious but it gives me a
significant competitive Advantage if you
haven't tried it go down to a Tesco go
to a waitrose or go online and use the
code diary 10 at checkout and you'll get
10% off and when you do try it let me
know how you get on do you think we
could see love in the brain can you see
if some some 's in love in the brain if
we scan the brain of someone that's in
love when they're interacting with their
partner could we see that um yes in fact
they have Scan people who are in the
throws of of uh um romantic love and
people that are in um you know many
years into a loving
relationship and there are uh lots of
reward areas that get activated when
you're scanning the brain um of somebody
that that you know is in the throws of
deep romantic love that is in the first
few weeks you can't get enough of the
person you're with them all the time you
can't stop thinking about them a lot of
the reward areas are are activated uh a
lot of the social interaction areas
including the insula uh part of the
brain right in the side here just just
uh in the uh area near the ear deep into
the cortex get gets activated doesn't
that mean then that if we don't fall in
love if we don't have those feelings
that that part of our brain might shrink
because if you know they say often
things like you you use it or you lose
it they say neurons that fire together
wi together if I'm not in love if I'm
not if I don't have those social
connections will the love part of my
brain get smaller and would that make it
more difficult to love in the future
that's a great question I think that um
that study has not been done but
absolutely if uh uh if you don't use
that part of the brain um you will not
you know gain the function and so yeah
not not using your love part of your
brain is is not a nothing that I would
ever recommend some people I guess don't
have a choice well I guess they have a
choice in the sense that they can do
things they have optionality but for
whatever reason some people don't find
love it's just an interesting
observation because in all other parts
of the brain you have to like do you
mean romantic love romantic love Yeah
but but you know there's all sorts of
different kinds of Love deep friendship
um it's actually what I was going to say
is that um they tried to look at the
difference between romantic love and
maternal love or paternal love and it
turns out that longterm relationships
like romantic relationships of marriages
that last for many years start out of
course in this romantic phase but it
turns into more of a maternal paternal
um pattern when you go farther and
farther along that that is a win that is
not something wrong with your brain um I
think love does evolve over time and
there's many different kinds of Love
beyond the Romantic
Hollywood you know uh and Disney kind of
uh uh form of love so you can see the
honeymoon phase in the brain yes and
then you can see the more mature love I
guess yes in the brain interesting oh
the I guess the the opposite of love
I guess might be hate but I think when
another sort of thing that people might
think of as the opposite of Love would
be rejection or heartbreak and through
all of our Lives we encounter heartbreak
in many forms we encounter romantic
heartbreak but also other forms of
heartbreak as I read through your story
I I I I could see moments in your story
where you encountered various types of
heartbreak yes grief yeah you talked
about your father passing away from
Alzheimer's yes well he had a heart
attack he had Alzheimer's dementia when
he passed away he he died of a heart
attack and just three months after your
dad's death your younger brother died of
an unexpected heart attack age 50 yes
and you say in your book good anxiety in
chapter four you say the death was
unfathomable
yeah as someone who studied the brain
and therefore has a really strong
understanding of the physiology of the
human mind yeah and has
also written a book about anxiety so you
have this sort of two-pronged approach
towards understanding feelings and
emotions
yeah in those
moments what did you come to understand
about the nature of emotion the most
intense emotions and how how they
Captivate Us and how we can find our
path through the
jungle yeah I like that word that I used
it was
unfathomable um
um both of those losses at at the same
time it it was hard to process and I
remember the waves of grief that would
come over it wasn't constant it would it
would it would be like wave so I I I
have one and then it would recede and I
felt a little bit better but then
unexpectedly it would come again and um
I'd never thank goodness experienced
that before and um it was in the middle
of writing the book good anxiety and I I
put it aside uh because I couldn't write
when I was going through this this
terrible grief and and had to do
something that I'd never ever had to do
and actually was my biggest fear um
unnamed biggest fear in my life was um
to have to give a eulogy I I have a fear
of uncontrollable crying in public and
I'd always been afraid of of eulogies
and I never had to give a eulogy and I
had to give this eulogy for my for my
brother um um another unfathomable how
could that be
happening and
um I I got I got through that and um I
learned something in the process and I
remember working out to try and make
myself feel feel better during this time
and um the instructor said about the
workout with great pain comes great
wisdom
and I just glommed on to
that that message because I was feeling
great pain what was the wisdom like I
need to find some wisdom what what is
that
wisdom and I realized because I had to
say something at this eulogy that the
wisdom was that on the other side of
that unfathomable grief that I was
feeling the only reason why I was
feeling that unfathomable grief is
because because of the deep love that I
had that it started with so if I didn't
love them as much I wouldn't have as
deep a grief so in fact the grief and
the the the depth of
it was a
sign of the love that I had for
them and
that that was the wisdom that I found
and that was the Solace that I found and
that was a message that I gave in that
eulogy
and um and then I became obsessed with
the flip side of these awful emotions
that we all go through grief is this one
because I had to go back and finish this
book good anxiety how was I going to do
that the book was transformed by that
event because I realized that if I could
find the wisdom and
the the
power um of the most horrible emotion
I'm going to say
grief what is the flip side of anxiety
what is the gift what is the superpower
that comes from anxiety and I needed to
find gifts and superpowers and that's
why the book got written in that way and
I I name superpowers that come from
anxiety that was that was heightened
after after this terrible event but I
found them and I used them all the time
it was therapeutic
actually how did it change you the loss
of your brother and your father in such
a short period of Time how are you a
different person because of those two
events you realize
that everybody's going to feel these
emotions sometime in their
life and I can bring more empathy and
compassion to those experience for
others and I I remember I I never wanted
to talk to people that had a loss I
never knew what to say I knew I was
going to say something wrong I just had
no idea I felt
lost and um and it is I do feel wiser I
feel like I have more empathy I have
more
knowledge can I ask you a question if if
if there was a pill yeah that you could
take to not feel the
grief in the moment when you were in the
throws of that grief would you have
taken it and in hindsight now would you
have taken
it look I I know I'm not a pill taker I
I wasn't
clinically I didn't feel like I'm oh I
can't you know go about my life it was
it was a terrible emotion but I I didn't
feel completely debilitated with it
other other people do maybe they would
take the pill I would not take the pill
and
after the lessons that I learned from
going through those emotions absolutely
I would not take the pill and and that
was part of the lesson of writing this
book that
anxiety is critical for us because
anxiety and sadness and and
anger are critical
to help us appreciate those joyous
moments if of Our Lives if we had no
grief no sadness no anger
ever then every day would you know it
would just be mundane but it gives that
value I mean our highest Highs are extra
high because we know those lows and and
that also is probably how this grief
that I experienced affects me I I
appreciate I appreciate the the good
times even more as a neuroscientist who
understands the brain and the systems
and then sort of neural Pathways and all
this stuff and how we think and does
that leave much room for
spirituality and those kinds of things
are you spiritual I am and what does
what you know because when some people
think about spirituality they think they
think it's the opposite of Neuroscience
they think yes if I spoke to some people
some people that I know they think of
that the decisions and the feelings and
the energies are outside of our body not
going on in this ball of tofu and then
some like
hardore people scientists will will
explain all of our experience through
this ball of tofu yes where do you sit
so um I've evolved over time so um when
I was a young scientist I no
spirituality no religion everything can
be described by science like I have
prove it prove it to me I want to you
know see the data I happily went through
um that phase for many many years of my
life until I realized or I didn't even
realize I think I needed something more
in in my life and and then I realized
first there was a need there was a then
there was a realization well can I
really prove that the only thing that is
true
is that what I what I can prove what if
there are things
Beyond um proving in the in the
scientific
method and I think there are things that
uh in the spiritual realm in the
religious realm um that absolutely could
be true could be true could be true that
cannot be solved cannot be proven with
the classic scientific method things
that you believe
yes what makes you believe them cuz on
one hand you said you kind of want to
which is an element of that yeah but as
a I'm interested as a scientist as a
neuroscientist yeah you must have been
trained to be able to explain that's how
you pass the exam so you get you must be
able to explain why you have these
beliefs do you in that part of your life
do you just kind of say I've I've felt
it is that the no it's uh well part of
it yes I I I do feel it but it was the
realization that the scientific
method in my opinion is not the endall
and be all that I thought it was when I
was a young scientist can you prove that
these other Realms don't exist and if
they exist in ways that cannot be proved
in in a scientific method well maybe
your scientific method is wrong is that
is that a possibility have you had an
experience that made you believe in
another Realm have I had an experience
um I have uh in my academic
way I have
studied texts that
are the oldest texts that we know um uh
the Bible and I was raised in a um
actually was a half Christian half
Buddhist um family and uh but my my
my core belief was uh uh Christianity
and so yeah I I I I go to church I I
really appreciate the power um
that that religious beliefs bring to my
life it actually really decreases my
anxiety and that's not the only reason
why I did I just I I wasn't look
searching for an anti- anxiety kind of
um uh solu
but I was looking
for maybe something more than the
scientific method in my
life we're going in One Direction as a
society like more I told you I'm
basically addicted to my phone screens
loneliness yeah um less connection less
friends less people we can turn to in a
time of Crisis according to all the
studies and as we go further and further
down that road I think it's making it
more obvious of what's at the end the
other end of the street yeah and it's
robbing us of something at a really deep
level then I think I'm noticing more and
more as I grow older I think that's
actually why I want to have kids now
because I think I'm in search of that
greater meaning or purpose in my life
beyond just like making more money or
just you know all the superficial stuff
yeah you you said to me before we
started speaking that you're thinking a
lot about Community I am why because I
think it is a bomb
to students and to everybody and um I
think those those events that we can
create that bring people together and
talking to each other and learning about
each other are joyous events and um I
see it in the in in me and in the
students that come to these events it is
clear that that is um something that
that is a little bit unfamiliar to
students right now but um has an
immediate effect so what is the one
thing we haven't spoke about regarding
Betty the brain over there in the corner
but the brain in front of you the most
important thing about the brain that we
didn't
discuss you
know you only have one and um we have an
opportunity every single
day to make
it as healthy as it could be I my I
watched my father pass away with
Alzheimer's dementia and um um we have
elderly people in my family as well
and it motivates me even more to to keep
my brain healthy to make as many friends
as I can to have as many connections as
I can uh because I want to be as happy
as I can be for the rest of my life and
I want to have um and I want to have a
big fat fluffy brain so um you only have
one and um there are things you can do
right now now today to make it
stronger Wendy thank you so much thank
you
for the way that you deliver I think is
um is so deep rooted in a really
undeniable passion and you you're on a
real mission to make other people live
better lives and I think that's
something that deserves to be highly
commended it's it's so apparent in
everything you do that you're so focused
on helping others in a way that I don't
always see
um and that comes from I you know
reading through your story I can see the
pivotal moments throughout your story
that sent you on that mission and I do
describe it as a mission these two books
are fantastic you wrote the book in 20
or you published it in 2015 called
healthy brain happy life and then your
second book which came out in America
called good anxiety which is a
phenomenal book that really helps to
reframe how we think about anxiety I
think that reframing helps us experience
it differently but also shall I say dare
I say be grateful for the signal the
lessons that it's there to teach us the
wisdom that it gives us we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest not knowing who they're
leaving it for question left you is in
this book
oh what do you think is the best quality
of humanity
ooh
compassion and what does that mean
compassion means
feeling feeling for the um um the
experience of others both good and bad
so I can experience your joy
compassionately and I could experience
your grief compassionately I think that
is because I've been thinking so much
about connection and
community that um function of uh or
emotion of comat
is uh really top of mind for me Wendy
thank you thank you
[Music]
m